the October 7th Hamas terror attack it
triggered Israel's declaration of war
against Hamas and since then more than a
million Palestinians in Gaza have been
forced from their homes tens of
thousands have reportedly died the UN
says many more are facing famine it is
this humanitarian crisis in Gaza not the
Hamas attack on Israel that has spawned
student protests on campuses here in
Europe and in the United States there
were dramatic scenes at Columbia
University in New York where students
occupied and barric ated themselves at
Hamilton Hall demanding that the
university divest itself from all
Israeli businesses and last week protest
erupted again in Los Angeles at UCLA
police were called in to restore order
polls show some public support for the
students but majorities in the US do not
approve of what these protests have
morphed into May 8th 2024 an early
morning operation at George Washington
University Police deploy pepper spray to
a pro Palestinian demonstrators from the
area today little remains of the protest
Camp the George Washington University
has now scrubed the signs of the former
encampment there's now a fence
surrounding the former main protest side
it remains uncertain how the protest
will develop Beyond this week as the
school year has basically
ended in April students here built a
camp to protest the war in Gaza one of
more than four dozen at us
universities nationally almost 2,800
people have been arrested on charges
including trespassing and assaulting
police
officers the campus protest have
triggered a national debate on how to
protect Free Speech without enabling
anti-Semitism or the harassment of
Jewish
students AR Patinkin is a Jewish student
at George Washington University he spoke
to us from his home really upset about
what whenever I would walk by people
would stare at us and harass us I was
com back from uh from coming back from
Shabbat I was taking one of my friends
home which happened to be going through
the encampment and we were spat at and
uh harassed but student protest
organizers say that the discussion
around the safety of Jewish students
distract from what they see as the main
issue the war in Gaza we talked with
Mahmud beun before the encampment was
cleared the conversation anti-Semitism
is a uh is a ploy to move us away from
the current conversation we have Jewish
students here we have non-jewish
students here we have Muslim Students
here we have non-muslim students here so
the conversation uh crosses any
religious line any cultural line it's a
debate that remains unresolved GW
students here say they experienced the
demonstration as mostly calm but have
heard of uncomfortable exceptions but I
really don't see any danger from it I
honestly think it's one of the most
peaceful ones I've seen so far in terms
of violence I have not personally
witnessed any I personally have not felt
not safe but I know that a lot of my
friends have voiced that to me that they
don't feel really comfortable walking
around the specific area before the
encampment was cleared police had said
the protests were largely peaceful but
what they called a gradual escalation
and volatility moved them to disperse
the camp Dana fisha studies activist and
protest movements she says keeping
people on message and maintaining tring
discipline is more difficult the bigger
a movement gets that's one of the
challenges when you bring when you call
for people to join you in solidarity or
join you in the streets or join you at
an encampment you get what you get and
then you work with it and in terms of
there being more extreme views or people
with extreme views in the streets or in
the encampments in this case it's very
common you basically call for people to
come out in solidarity and whoever comes
comes the question moving forward is who
will stay the next weeks will determine
whether the movement sustains itself as
campuses released students for the
summer my next guest has made a name for
himself on both sides of the Atlantic
for his writings on the crisis of modern
democracy he is the author of several
books including the great experiment why
diverse democracies fall apart and how
they can endure in his latest book the
identity trap a story of ideas and Power
in our time he's also a professor at
John Tomkins Unity University's school
of advanced International Studies I'm
happy to welcome back to the program
tonight political sciences Yasha monk
Yasha it's good to see you again
students turned activists made possible
by the Ivory Tower is that what is
happening Yasha and if so I mean how is
it
happening um well I mean you know
students have always been politically
active as nothing completely new about
that um it's also understandable that
particularly students who uh maybe Arab
in origin or maybe Muslim feel a
particular kind of kinship uh to uh
those who are suffering in Gaza at the
moment I think what's been striking for
about these protests is um both the
rhetoric and the extent of support among
uh parts of the academic left among
people most of whom do not have personal
stakes in the conflict in the Middle
East and who have
Justified uh their rhetoric in terms
that are rather different
um casting it as a form of
intersectional struggle in which long
that que for Palestine really imply that
there's a natural connection between
discrimination that sexual minorities
might experience in the United States
and what's going on in the Middle East
uh today um sometimes rhetoric which
basically tries to assimilate Israel
into a sort of white colonizing state
that is you know suppressing people of
color um and there we're really seeing
the application of a set of basic uh
ideological categories that at the core
of a new set of ideas about identity
that has become very influential on the
American left and the international left
over the last years to this very
complicated conflict in the Middle East
in ways that I think are overly
simplistic and and ultimately conceal
more than they reveal about the events
there do do you think that University
students are being educated we hear from
some members of society that they're
being indoctrinated to to see the world
in a very binary way um groups being
either the oppressed or the oppressors
and it we get that example with the
Israelis versus the
Palestinians um yes I think there is a
strong strain of this ideology which is
present uh in universities but often is
uh reinforced
by uh administrators at amican
universities by a growing uh bureaucracy
that has come to play a much larger role
in the life of students as well and so
there is at least a segment of both
academics and students that looked at
the events of October 7th even before
the Israeli response and said uh you
know this is very simple this is a
question of whites versus people of
color of colonizers versus the colonized
um and you know in the since all forms
of uh racism are structural since they
have nothing to do with the contents of
people actuals beliefs um it means that
uh uh the oppressed uh are justified in
any form of resistance including violent
resistance including resistance that
involves the deliberate targeting and
murder of uh civilians y you wrote an
article that appeared in The Spectator
magazine earlier this month entitled how
universities raised a generation of
activists and you write that um
universities should publicly commit
themselves to upholding both free speech
and public order but it's probably too
late for principle to save them from
their current troubles for now they're
condemned to look like Hypocrites
whatever they do because due to the
failures of the past few years they
are what have been their big mistakes of
the
past so look in order to uphold Free
Speech you need to uphold two core
principles the first is that people need
to be free to say what they want and
wish even if that is controversial even
if that involves some of the statements
of pro Palestinian protesters like
calling for Global in that I personally
find to be deeply upsetting at the same
time uh Free Speech has always entailed
restrictions on the place time and
manner of expressing those views you're
not entitled to occupy buildings in the
University because you happen to dislike
the policies of the University you're
not entitled to shout down speakers or
stop other academic events from going on
because you disagree with them
politically that isn't part of free
speech that is giving you the right to
restrict the free speech of others now
unfortunately American universities have
failed on both of those things for the
last 10 or 20 years they've started to
censor all kinds of political speech
when it was offensive to various
minority groups um and they have
tolerated things like tent encampments
during Occupy Wall Street or at Harvard
for example that the University
president's office was occupied for
weeks on end over um a an issue
involving labor at the University and so
I understand Jewish students who since
October 7th said why is it that every
microaggression is met by a biased
response team and sometimes by very
severe sanctions against students but we
have to tolerate uh people fight you
know calling for Global intera um I also
understand prop Palestinian
demonstrators who said you know you have
the norm you introduced uh for many
decades but you never call the police
but now in this conflict you're calling
the police universities have failed to
live up to both of those sets of free
speech principles and so now uh they
can't fall back on them without looking
like Hypocrites yeah exactly it's like
parents who have never been
disciplinarians suddenly trying to
ground their children when their when
their children are are teenagers I guess
and I want to pick up one thing before
we run out of time and that is some
University professors saying that what
we're seeing in 2024
is The Logical Legacy of what we saw in
the 1960s student um protest um do you
do you really see that I mean I know you
point out that in 1968 after the riots
we saw in the country that Sumer Richard
Nixon went on to defeat Hubert Humphrey
by promising Law and Order and I I just
want to ask you are you hinting that Joe
Biden may be the 2024 version of Hubert
Humphrey
I I think that risk certainly exists um
this conflict has split the Democratic
base much more than the Republican base
um and of course um it makes it easier
for Donald Trump to make the argument
that the country is somehow out of
control and that it takes somebody like
him to restore order um and so I do
worry that Justice the protests in 1968
do appear according to strong research
and political science by people like
Omar waso and others to have helped
Richard ni win the election that
November uh the same fate May before the
United States When Donald Trump is again
up on the ballot in a few months yeah
well if if that happens um we definitely
will invite you to come back and and and
talk about the repercussions of the
election in November Yasha monk we
appreciate you taking the time to talk
with us tonight thank you